Render Architecture Overview & Pipelined Rendering Book Pages (#2469)
bevyengine/bevy-website: content/learn/book/the-renderer/render-architecture.md

+++
title = "Bevy's Rendering Architecture"
insert_anchor_links = "right"
[extra]
weight = 1
+++

> The goal of Bevy's renderer is provide a simple, fast, and modular series of tools.

Reviewer: Have you seen https://hackmd.io/@bevy/S1e1ffy2ex ?

Author: Ooo, I had not seen that. Thanks for the link! I was mostly referencing release posts of yore for information, but I'll update the page with info from that document

Starting with the higher level interactions within Bevy, the full stack looks something like this:

1. Bevy's Renderer
2. Graphics Libraries & Tools (WGPU)
3. Graphics API (Vulkan, Metal, DirectX, OpenGL, etc.)
4. GPU Driver (AMD, NVIDIA, Intel, Apple, etc.)
5. GPU Hardware (The actual graphics card)

Every frame, your game will send data to the Bevy renderer to determine what is rendered to the player's screen.
The renderer's job is to organize this data before sending it to a graphics library (WGPU by default).
The graphics library then accesses the API calls of the underlying graphics API (Vulkan, Metal, DirectX, OpenGL, etc.) to send the data to the GPU.
Finally, these calls are processed by the GPU driver and then executed on the GPU hardware itself, rendering a frame to screen.

## WGPU

In order to take advantage of the power that modern GPUs are capable of while avoiding the complexity of using raw graphics APIs, Bevy uses [WGPU](https://wgpu.rs/) (via the [`wgpu`](https://crates.io/crates/wgpu) crate) to handle the low-level graphics API calls.

> WGPU is the Rust implementation of [the WebGPU specification](https://webgpu.org/), a modern, low-level graphics library that can natively target pretty much every popular graphics API: Vulkan, DirectX 12, Metal, OpenGL, WebGL2, and WebGPU.

Reviewer 2: this sentence feels weirdly worded to me
it sounds like it's saying that webgpu is a graphics library that can target native apis, instead of that wgpu is that
i say we remove the mention of the webgpu spec from the sentence entirely, it's not really relevant to a user of bevy and just causes confusion especially because webgpu is mentioned later

[`BindGroup`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_resource/struct.BindGroup.html
[`PhaseItem`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_phase/trait.PhaseItem.html
[`RenderSystems::PhaseSort`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/enum.RenderSystems.html#variant.PhaseSort
[`RenderGraph`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_graph/struct.RenderGraph.html
[`RenderPipeline`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_resource/struct.RenderPipeline.html
[`Node`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_graph/trait.Node.html
[`Edge`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_graph/enum.Edge.html
[`Slot`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_graph/enum.SlotType.html
[`Resource`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/ecs/prelude/trait.Resource.html

### Using Shader Languages

Within a [`RenderPipeline`], we can use shading language scripts to help modify the final look of our renders.
Specifically, Bevy uses the [WGSL] language (and soon the [WESL] language as well!) to write these scripts, which are made available in the pipeline for any specified [`RenderGraph`] to use.

> WGSL was built specifically for WebGPU (WGPU) rendering; if you choose to replace WGPU with another rendering solution, you'll have to look at what shading language to use instead.

Reviewer 2: saying webgpu (wgpu) here also i feel feeds into the confusion between the two, especially considering they have very similar names

+++
title = "Bevy's Rendering Architecture"
insert_anchor_links = "right"
[extra]
weight = 1
+++

> The goal of Bevy's renderer is provide a series of modular, performant, and cross-platform-compatible tools.

Reviewer 3: This paragraph could be punchier, but the content is good. Try taking a more active voice: "Bevy's renderer..."

It has to provide industry standard features and capabilities while still remaining accessible and approachable to users who are not very familiar with graphics programming.

> And of course, it has to produce the visuals that Bevy users want: if the rendering output isn't pretty (or intentionally _not_ pretty), then what is even the point!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And of course, it has to produce the visuals that Bevy users want: if the rendering output isn't pretty (or intentionally weird in just the right ways), then what is even the point!
```

Even though Bevy's core audience is game developers, we know that Bevy is used much more broadly.
While we aren't going to be able to satisfy everyone, our goal is to make the renderer flexible enough for users to feel that they can always work with it.
If some feature isn't implemented directly, you should be able to build on what already exists, or have the space to create that functionality yourself.

> We want Bevy's renderer to be useful when making pixel art, stylized 2D, high-end PBR, CAD visualizations, and anything else you can think of.

Reviewer 3: A sentence after this about the tradeoffs and modularity required to make this work would be well-placed.

Before we start detailing _how_ you can start using the many features of Bevy's renderer, it'll help to understand _what_ the renderer is doing and _why_ it's set up the way it is.
Understanding these concepts will allow you to get a bird's eye view of the rendering process and let you know where to look when you start working with the renderer.

## The Graphics Stack

Modern computers can come with some seriously powerful hardware.
GPUs in particular have evolved into the workhorses of modern games, utilizing millions of processing units to render complex graphics at unbelievable speeds.
But the GPU doesn't inherently know how to output a "photo-realistic pirate ship" or a "voxel world filled with cubed creatures".
Ultimately it's up to the developers to both create the scenes they desire and establish how those scenes should actually look.

> While Bevy can only provide the tools to help with that first part, it does a lot more when it comes to the second.

Reviewer 3: Confusing phrasing! This would probably be a good place to tie into assets.

Specifically, Bevy provides a robust rendering solution that allows users to interact with as much or as little of the rendering process as they want.

> Whether you want to stay purely in Bevy, dig into the graphics libraries Bevy utilizes, or dive straight into the raw graphics API calls in Vulkan or DirectX, Bevy has designed its renderer to fit all of these use cases.

Reviewer 3: Weak phrasing and structure.

> Starting with the higher level interactions within Bevy, the full stack looks something like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At a high level, the full stack looks something like this:
```

1. Bevy's Renderer

> 2. Graphics Libraries & Tools (WGPU)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Unification layer (WGPU)
```

This is structurally optional, and I think it's better to communicate that directly.

Reviewer 4: wgpu is generally referred to as an abstraction layer

> 3. Graphics API (Vulkan, Metal, DirectX, OpenGL, etc.)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. Graphics API (Vulkan, Metal, DirectX12, WebGPU, etc.)
```

We officially don't support OpenGL so I'd prefer if it wasn't mentioned here and instead we do target webgpu so it should be mentioned. We also only support DX12 so we should be more specific.

4. GPU Driver (AMD, NVIDIA, Intel, Apple, etc.)
5. GPU Hardware (The actual graphics card)

Every frame, your game will send data to the Bevy renderer to determine what is rendered to the player's screen.

> The renderer's job is to organize this data before sending it to a graphics library (WGPU by default).

Reviewer 3: This sentence and the one after need to be reshaped to better focus on the idea of unification.

The graphics library then accesses the API calls of the underlying graphics API (Vulkan, Metal, DirectX, OpenGL, etc.) to send the data to the GPU.
Finally, these calls are processed by the GPU driver and then executed on the GPU hardware itself, rendering a frame to screen.

> ## WGPU

Reviewer 4: There should definitely be a small paragraph or sentence that explains the differences and relationships between wgpu and webgpu. This is very confusing to many people and we should help demystify it a bit here.

> In order to take advantage of the power that modern GPUs are capable of while avoiding the complexity of using raw graphics APIs, Bevy uses [WGPU](https://wgpu.rs/) (via the [`wgpu`](https://crates.io/crates/wgpu) crate) to handle the low-level graphics API calls.

Reviewer 3: This is a poor framing: Bevy's rendering stack itself is where the complexity management happens, for the most part. `wgpu` mostly serves as a consistent cross-platform abstraction.

> WGPU is a modern, low-level graphics library that can natively target pretty much every popular graphics API: Vulkan, DirectX 12, Metal, OpenGL, WebGL2, and WebGPU.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
WGPU is a modern, low-level graphics library that can natively target every popular graphics API released after 2010: Vulkan, DirectX 12, Metal, OpenGL, WebGL2, and WebGPU.
```

> Regardless of whether you're using Windows, MacOS, or Linux (or Android or iOS), WGPU translates your requests into the appropriate graphics API calls before sending them to the GPU to be rendered.

Reviewer 3: Awkward phrasing.

{% callout(type="info") %}
### Why WGPU?

> While there would be some benefit in creating our own rendering solution, the truth of the matter is that WGPU already occupies exactly the space that Bevy currently needs:

Reviewer 3: This would be much stronger if it steelmanned the opposition better, talking about the performance, complexity and uneven features plainly.

- Multiple supported backends by default, with the goal to support as many platforms as possible.
- A "baseline" feature set that works almost everywhere with a consistent API.
- A "limits" and "features" system that enables turning on arbitrary, sometimes backend-specific features and detecting when those features are available.
- A modern GPU API, but without the pain and complexity of raw Vulkan/DirectX/Metal.
  - Perfect for user-facing Bevy renderer extensions!

{% end %}

> For practical purposes, we'll only be covering features that come built-in to Bevy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This book focuses on Bevy's own rendering features, but a broader base of knowledge is quite useful, and you may occasionally want to interact with WGPU directly for advanced features.
```

If you are interested in learning more about WGPU, we can point you towards [Learn WGPU](https://sotrh.github.io/learn-wgpu/), a series of tutorials that can help you learn more about working with WGPU and graphics programming concepts in general.

{% callout(type="info") %}

> ### Replacing WGPU

Reviewer 3: This section should be folded into the "Why WGPU" note above.

> ### Replacing WGPU

Reviewer 3: Later on, I want a dedicated page on "rendering modularity" that gets into the strategies. Nothing to do for now though.

Bevy's renderer is designed to allow the user as much control over the rendering process as they want.

> Even though we'll recommend to stick with WGPU for your projects, it isn't impossible to replace if you really want to.

Reviewer 3: Too condescending and negative; cut.

> We'll cover the process of replacing WGPU in a future page.

Reviewer 3: Do not promise ahead of time!

Reviewer 4: I don't think this should be included in the book. I think that's a bit too niche. I think an example is better place for that.

{% end %}

> ## Pipelined Rendering

Reviewer 3: This section needs much stronger motivation, and to explain what "pipelining" is. Why do we do this?

> ## Pipelined Rendering

Reviewer 3: This entire section deserves its own page (same PR is fine). Rendering stack and central dogma of rendering are two meaningfully different topics with a clean boundary.

Bevy uses a pipelined rendering process that exists and operates on a separate CPU thread from the main app `World`.

> Information about each scene is extracted from the main app `World` and into a `RenderWorld` that is then rendered to the screen using the GPU.

Reviewer 3: `RenderWorld` is not a real type.

> Information about each scene is extracted from the main app `World` and into a `RenderWorld` that is then rendered to the screen using the GPU.

Reviewer 3: Retained render world needs to be at least mentioned here.

Author: I've tried crawling the docs.rs for this, not quite sure what you mean here. Could you explain a bit more or point me in the right direction please :)

Reviewer 4: In the past we would completely recreate the render world every frame but more recently we now retain as much data as possible between frame and only update the data that has changed between frames. That's the gist of it. Here's a link to the news post of the first bevy version with this feature https://bevy.org/news/bevy-0-15/#retained-rendering-world

Author: Perfect, thanks!

This extraction happens once per frame, and can be delayed if either the game logic in `World` or the rendering process in `RenderWorld` takes longer than the other.

> `RenderWorld` still abides by the E.C.S. principles and even has its own schedules and systems to control how the scene is rendered.

Reviewer 3: No periods in E.C.S.

> `RenderWorld` still abides by the E.C.S. principles and even has its own schedules and systems to control how the scene is rendered.

Reviewer 3: This internal consistency is both important and interesting and should be surfaced much earlier in the document.

{% callout(type="info") %}

> #### GPU Vs CPU Rendering 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### GPU-driven vs CPU-driven Rendering 
```

CPU-driven rendering is where draw commands are created on the CPU, and only passed to the GPU to finally be rendered.

> Bevy used to perform its rendering setup this way, using the CPU to choose which objects needed to be rendered and how they needed to be rendered before passing that information to the GPU.

Reviewer 3: Writing structure is weak here. Lay out CPU-driven vs GPU-driven, *then* go into what Bevy currently does, and briefly mention what competitors do and what Bevy used to do.

> However, this process was inefficient and did not align with modern rendering standards.

Reviewer 3: Weak; revise to make more grounded.

Eventually the task of calculating what objects needed to be rendered was changed to be GPU-driven.
With GPU-driven rendering, the CPU is only responsible for passing data to the GPU.
Draw commands are encoded on the GPU by compute shaders, and the GPU determines which objects need to be rendered.

> This leverages GPU parallelism, and unlocks more advanced culling optimizations that are infeasible to do on the CPU, among many other methods that bring large performance benefits.

Reviewer 3: Hand-waving; cut or improve.

{% end %}

> `RenderWorld` uses a series of sequentially executed [`RenderSystem`]s to carry out each step of the rendering process.

Reviewer 3: This needs to plainly state that we're just using ordinary ECS schedules now.

> `RenderWorld` uses a series of sequentially executed [`RenderSystem`]s to carry out each step of the rendering process.

Reviewer 3: The "RenderSystems" framing is bad, because it over-indexes on a specific implementation detail, and it confuses "sequentially ordered sets of systems" with "linear single threaded mega-systems". Focus on teaching the core phases here, and how data flows through them.

Look at explanations of the "central dogma of molecular biology" for a good reference of how this should be structured.

Each system has a specific purpose that relies on data processed in the previous system, which is why they need to be ordered in a specific sequence.
It's also possible for certain systems to be skipped if its function isn't required.
We'll look at how each [`RenderSystem`] is set up in a separate page, but for now we'll just do an overview of the whole process.
Specifically, we can look at the main five steps that occur during rendering:

>  **1. Extract**

Reviewer 3: `SyncToRenderWorld` and the `RenderEntity`/`MainEntity` pair would be good to mention here.

To render an image to the screen, we first have to figure out what is happening in our game!
We use the Extract step to copy information from the main app `World` into the `RenderWorld`.
Specifically, a buffer of component data is sent to `RenderWorld` every frame.

How do we know what data is actually sent to `RenderWorld` though?
One way of accomplishing this is to derive the [`ExtractComponent`] trait on the components that we want to transfer to the `RenderWorld`.
Other ways including manually setting up systems specifically designed to send component data based on input or other events.

> Some Bevy components will also be sent automatically, like assets, meshes, and textures, and thus you do not have to manually specify that they need to be extracted.

Reviewer 3: This is too magic; explain how this is actually done.

**2. Prepare**

The Prepare step is used to set up the GPU resources needed for rendering.

> This is where assets and meshes are set up for the GPU to use, along with creating [`BindGroup`]s that hold the data needed for rendering.

Reviewer 3: BindGroups as things that "hold" data is not really the right model. Bind groups are for declaring data dependencies. Closer to pointers than vecs. Probably work in BindGroupLayout too.

> **3. Queue**

Reviewer 3: The causality / ordering on prepare vs queue is complicated. See `Prepare` vs `PrepareMeshes` for example. I'm not sure how to resolve it in this format, but maybe the rendering experts have ideas.

This is where we begin to set up the actual jobs that have to be done by the renderer.
Once our mesh data and bind groups have been set up, we can start queuing the individual items ([`PhaseItem`]s) that the GPU has to render.
This step can also include an optional sorting step ([`RenderSystems::PhaseSort`]) depending on how each item is queued.

> **4. Render**

Reviewer 3: Bevy's camera-driven rendering is important to at least *mention*, and here is probably a decent spot.

Author: I do agree, but I don't know if we can get too into here without a Camera-driven Rendering page to link out to (which is the next page I'm working on). Could we leave it as is for now, and then once the Camera-driven Rendering page is in add in a bit here about it and then link out to the page?

This is where the magic finally happens!
Using [`RenderGraph`]s, we execute each [`PhaseItem`] that we queued in the previous step, incorporating the specified [`RenderPipeline`]s and [`BindGroup`]s that help us get the desired look.
Again, we'll go into more detail in a future page, but it's important to briefly cover what exactly a [`RenderGraph`] is and what it does.

> A [`RenderGraph`] is exactly what it sounds like, a graph!

Reviewer 3: RenderGraphs are now obsolete!

Its used to create the commands that are eventually sent to the GPU to render the game to the screen.
Textures and buffers (and occasionally Entities) are passed along the `RenderGraph` to construct the draw calls that are sent to the GPU.

`RenderGraph`s consists of [`Node`]s, [`Edge`]s, and [`Slot`]s.
Nodes are responsible for generating draw calls and operating on input and output slots.
Edges specify the order of execution for nodes and connect input and output slots together.
Slots describe the render resources created or used by the nodes.

**5. Cleanup**

> Once all [`RenderGraph`]s have finished executing, the `RenderWorld` is cleared of all entities and the data is reset.

Reviewer 3: No longer true! Retained RenderWorld is a thing.

If you need data to persist in the `RenderWorld`, you can use a [`Resource`] to store it in between frames.

[`RenderSystem`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/enum.RenderSystems.html
[`ExtractComponent`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/extract_component/trait.ExtractComponent.html
[`BindGroup`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_resource/struct.BindGroup.html
[`PhaseItem`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_phase/trait.PhaseItem.html
[`RenderSystems::PhaseSort`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/enum.RenderSystems.html#variant.PhaseSort
[`RenderGraph`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_graph/struct.RenderGraph.html
[`RenderPipeline`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_resource/struct.RenderPipeline.html
[`Node`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_graph/trait.Node.html
[`Edge`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_graph/enum.Edge.html
[`Slot`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/render/render_graph/enum.SlotType.html
[`Resource`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/latest/bevy/ecs/prelude/trait.Resource.html

> ### Using Shader Languages

Reviewer 3: New page!

> Within a [`RenderPipeline`], we can use shading language scripts to help modify the final look of our renders.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure script is the right terminology here? I've personally never seen anyone refer to a shader as a script at least. It's either a shader program, program, or just a shader.

Specifically, Bevy uses the [WGSL] language (and soon the [WESL] language as well!) to write these scripts, which are made available in the pipeline for any specified [`RenderGraph`] to use.

> WGSL is the shading language used by WGPU; if you choose to replace WGPU with another rendering solution, you'll have to look at what shading language to use instead.

Reviewer 4: Technically, it's the shading language used by WebGPU. WGPU supports more options than just wgsl. Bevy uses WGSL because it can target all the platforms we care about.

Much like the other non-Bevy topics, we won't be showcasing how to write WGSL (or WESL) code, however we will show how you can provide scripts to be used in your rendering pipelines.
To start learning WGSL, we recommend [the WebGPU Fundamentals page on WGSL](https://webgpufundamentals.org/webgpu/lessons/webgpu-wgsl.html).
For WESL, we recommend learning WGSL first, and then investigating WESL.
This is because WESL is an extension of the WGSL language, which means that you'll wind up learning WGSL anyways.
To read more about the WESL specifications, check out [the WESL feature list](https://wesl-lang.dev/docs/WESL-Extensions).

{% callout(type="info") %}

> #### Why Not Use Rust?

Reviewer 4: I feel like this chapter might be a bit misleading as to why we don't use something like rust-gpu. These days it is absolutely possible to use rust as a shading language. The main reason we don't do it is because we need to be able to compile shaders at runtime to handle pipeline combinations and that would imply shipping a rust compiler at runtime which is not something we want. I feel like this chapter should either be removed or talk about what I just mentioned.

Reviewer 3: 💯

Author: Made a note to add a section on this when we get around to the shading languages page/section.

When you compile Rust code, the Rust compiler works to build and optimize the code to be run on the CPU, a device which will usually only have a couple dozen cores and threads to use for processing.
CPUs are designed to switch between multiple single processes sequentially.
Think of the individual programs on your computer: internet browsers, email clients, and media players are all separate processes that aren't very intensive to individually run.

Meanwhile, shading languages are specially designed to run on the GPU, a device which can contain upwards of hundreds of millions (even billions!) of processing units.

> Each GPU processing unit is generally slower than a CPU's, but when all processing units are used together they're able to handle exponentially more, less intensive tasks at the same time.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Each GPU core is generally slower than a CPU's, but when all processing units are used together they're able to handle exponentially more, less intensive tasks at the same time.
```

Take outputting video to a display, for example.
Standard 1080p HD computer monitors will have 2,073,600 pixels, and each pixel will have a red, green, and blue value.
These values have to be repeatedly updated and calculated multiple times per second.
While the CPU could do the calculations, it's likely it would struggle to both constantly update the display and keep the application running smoothly.

It's this difference in device capabilities which requires us to use a specific shading language to help modify our rendering pipelines.

{% end %}

[WGSL]: https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb/wgsl/
[WESL]: https://wesl-lang.dev/

> ## 2D Vs 3D Rendering

Reviewer 3: Not the right place for this; cut. Probably in a dedicated page or chapter on 2D rendering.

Understanding these concepts will allow you to get a bird's eye view of the rendering process and let you know where to look when you start working with the renderer.

## The Graphics Stack

Modern computers can come with some seriously powerful hardware.
GPUs in particular have evolved into the workhorses of modern games, utilizing millions of cores to render complex graphics at unbelievable speeds.
But the GPU doesn't inherently know how to output a "photo-realistic pirate ship" or a "voxel world filled with cubed creatures".
It's ultimately up to you to create those scenes and find that "perfect look".

To help with achieving that "perfect look", Bevy is built to allow you to interact with as much or as little of the rendering process as you want.
You can set everything up within Bevy itself, allowing the tools Bevy provides to handle the dirty work.
Or you can dive into the graphics APIs yourself, bypassing our abstractions and wielding all the rendering power yourself!

All of this is enabled through a series of layers that send data from your game to the computer's GPU.
At a high level, those layers (affectionately called "the stack") looks something like this:

> 1. Bevy's Renderer

Reviewer 5: There's really 3 parts, as seen in bevy crates:

1. non render specific (e.g. app, ecs)
2. render data model (using `wgpu-types` )
3. rendering (using wgpu)

Importantly, this means you can use the same light and camera and material models (layer 2), and implement your own rendering layer 3

Maybe that is its own section?

Author: Yeah I think it would good to note this on a different page, maybe in the chapter index page or in a separate user-implemented rendering setup page. I don't think it would fit here though, my intent is to walkthrough the whole process from Bevy to the hardware. I think the "Bevy Renderer" as a whole entity helps to differentiate between WGPU, the graphics APIs, and the GPU driver and hardware.

But I'm also open to changing it if it is helpful to further specify!
